---
layout: base
title:  'Repository and files'
udver: '2'
redirect_from: "/release_checklist.html"
---

# Repository and Files

Contents:

- [Data split](#data-split)
- [The README file](#the-readme-file)
- [Treebank metadata](#treebank-metadata)
- [Repository branches](#repository-branches)

Every treebank has its own GitHub repository called `UD_Language-Treebank`, where `Language` is the name of the language and
`Treebank` is a unique identifier of a treebank within a language. For example, `UD_Finnish-TDT` and `UD_Finnish-FTB` are repositories
of two different treebanks of Finnish: `TDT` stands for “Turku Dependency Treebank”, and `FTB` stands for “FinnTreeBank”.
If treebanks in different languages are strongly related (especially if they are parallel translations of the same text),
it is desirable that they have the same treebank identifier. For example, `UD_English-LinES` and `UD_Swedish-LinES` are two halves
of an English-Swedish parallel treebank. On the other hand, it is allowed that two unrelated treebanks in different languages have
identical identifiers simply by chance. For example, `UD_French-FTB` (standing for “French TreeBank”) uses the identifier `FTB`
although it is not related to FinnTreeBank.

Every treebank repository should contain the following files (where `xx` is the ISO code for the
given language, and `y` is the lowercased treebank identifier). For example, `fi_tdt` is the code
used in the Turku Dependency Treebank of Finnish.
Small treebanks may have just the test file but no training and development data; see below for
more detailed recommendations for train-dev-test data splits. Since release 2.10, there is also
a minimum requirement on treebank size: 20 sentences and 100 words (both numbers must be reached
or exceeded; it shouldn't be difficult to reach with a translation of the examples from the
[Cairo Cicling Corpus](https://github.com/UniversalDependencies/cairo/blob/master/translations.txt)).

1. `README.md` or `README.txt`
2. `LICENSE.txt`
3. `CONTRIBUTING.md`
4. `xx_y-ud-test.conllu`
5. `xx_y-ud-train.conllu`
6. `xx_y-ud-dev.conllu`

The `README.md` file contains basic documentation of the treebank and machine-readable metadata
for the UD main page (see below) and the `LICENSE.txt` specifies under what license the treebank
is made available (see also [licensing](/contributing/licensing.html)).
The file `CONTRIBUTING.md` warns users about UD Github branch policies; this file is added when
the repository is created and treebank maintainers do not have to care about it.

The data files (training, development and test set) must be in the `CoNLL-U` format and conform to
the universal guidelines. They need to be validated as described below.

Repositories of released treebanks also contain a `stats.xml` file, which is generated as part of
the release-building process, using the script `conllu-stats.pl` available from the `tools`
repository. Data providers do not have to care about this file; it will be generated by the
release task force.

Any other files (treebank source files, processing scripts etc.) must be placed in a subfolder
named `not-to-release`.

## Data split

These guidelines are strong recommendations rather than strict rules.

The general underlying idea is that we do not want to ban tiny datasets from
being released, but we only want to distinguish training and test sets if
the test set will be large enough (the 10K-word threshold was set in the
CoNLL 2017 shared task) and if the data that is left for training is at least
as large as the test set. Making an official split is useful for comparison
of experiments evaluated on the treebank, but with small treebanks people
should do ten-fold cross-validation anyway.

There is one exception to that general idea. If this is the only UD treebank
in the given language, we may set aside a small sample and call it “train”.
This may be useful if the treebank is used in a shared task where the systems
are supposed to use cross-lingual projection techniques and cannot access the test data,
but the developers should have access at least to a small sample of the language
so they can see the annotation, language properties, etc.
In other situations, users should still use the entire data for training and
testing via cross-validation.
Providing the sample is completely optional.
Note that it does not make sense to set aside a sample
if a larger treebank of the same language exists and has training data.

1. If you have less than 20K words:
   * Option A: Keep everything as test data. Users will have to do 10-fold cross-validation if they want to train on it.
   * Option B: Only if there are no larger treebanks of this language, keep almost everything as test data but set aside a small sample (20 to 50 sentences) and call it “train”. Consider translating and annotating the 20 examples from the [Cairo Cicling Corpus](https://github.com/UniversalDependencies/cairo/blob/master/translations.txt) (CCC) and providing them as the sample.
2. If you have between 20K and 110K words, take a minimum of 10K words as test data, 10% of the remainder as dev data, and the remainder as training data.
3. If you have more than 110K words, take between 10K words and 10% of the data as test data, take another between 10K words and 10% of the data as dev data, and the remainder as test data.
4. If the treebank contains running text (rather than random shuffled sentences), make sure you split the data on document boundaries. Shuffling sentences should be avoided if possible, but sometimes it is necessary in order to prevent copyright issues. If you must shuffle, consider shuffling blocks of sentences (up to N characters long) rather than individual sentences.
5. If the treebank contains different domains or genres, try to distribute them proportionally to training, dev and test. Ideally, it should also be possible to tell them apart by sentence ids.
6. If the data in the treebank overlap with another UD treebank of the same language, make sure that the overlapping sentences end up in the same part (training/dev/test) in both treebanks! (By overlap we mean duplicate source text but not individual simple sentences that occur naturally at different positions of independent texts.)
7. If this is one language of a multi-lingual parallel treebank, make sure that corresponding sentences in all languages end up in the same part (training/dev/test)!
8. It is desirable that the data split of one treebank is stable across UD releases, i.e., a sentence that was in training data in release N is not moved to dev or test data in release N+1. We want to prevent accidental misguided results of experiments where people take a parser trained on UD 1.1 and apply it to test data from UD 1.2. In exceptional cases some restructuring that violates this rule can be approved by the release team, provided there are good reasons for it. (One obviously valid reason is that a growing treebank exceeds the 20K-word threshold and is split to training and test.) If at all possible, please try to plan ahead and minimize the need for re-splits in the future.

[//]: # (See also [this e-mail thread](https://cl.lingfil.uu.se/pipermail/ud/2015-November/000095.html). ChrisM: This link is dead in 2024.)

## The README file

The `README` file is distributed together with the data and summarizes information about the treebank for its users;
the contents of the file is also displayed by Github when readers land on the Github homepage of the treebank repository.
At the same time, certain pre-defined parts of the `README` file are automatically copied to the UD website to places
where individual treebanks are described. In these cases, the contents is interpreted as MarkDown and you can use the
[MarkDown syntax](https://guides.github.com/features/mastering-markdown/)
to add a little formatting (but please remember that some users will read directly the `README` file, so it should stay
reasonably human-readable).
The last part of the `README` file contains machine-readable metadata (described below) where selected vital information
must be provided in a fixed pre-defined way.

Similarly to the data files, the `README` file can be only modified in the `dev` branch of the repository, and changes are
propagated to the master branch and to other places twice a year at release time
(see the [Repository Branches](#repository-branches) section below for details).
Therefore, the `README` file should be in shape by the data freeze deadline; do not postpone it until after the release!
The most visible places of the website are based on the contents of the master branch and you will not be able to edit them
between releases (think of the website as of a journal with two numbers per year: you can publish information about your
treebank in the next issue, but you cannot publish corrections before the next issue is out).

MarkDown source files usually have the `.md` extension (`README.md`); but for historical reasons,
it is also possible to name the file `README.txt`.
Only one of these files must be present, it is not permitted to have both `README.md` and `README.txt`!

The `README` file should minimally contain the following information:

1. A description of the treebank and its origin (creation method, data sources, etc.)
2. A description of how the data was split into training, development and test sets
3. If there are multiple genres/domains, can they be told apart by sentence ids? Does the treebank consist of complete documents, or just randomly shuffled sentences?
4. Acknowledgments and references that should be cited when using the treebank
5. A [changelog](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Changelog) section for treebanks that will be released for the second (or subsequent) time
6. A machine-readable section with treebank metadata. This is described below.

MarkDown uses the `#` character to mark section headings. Several sections with fixed names are expected in every `README`
and will be searched for by various scripts. Use the following template (from Swedish) to adjust your `README`.
The first section, called _Summary_, should be rather short (one-two lines), so it can appear in an index page listing all
treebanks. An automatically generated treebank page in the UD documentation will take over the sections _Summary, Introduction_
and _Acknowledgments._ Note that the pre-defined section headings must be top-level headings, i.e. just one `#` character
at the beginning of the line! Any nested subsections (two or more `#` characters at the beginning of the line) are considered part
of the superordinate section and will be copied with it.

<pre>
# Summary

UD Swedish-TP is a conversion of the Prose section of Talbanken, originally annotated in the MAMBA annotation scheme,
and consisting of a variety of informative text genres, including textbooks, information brochures and newspaper articles.

# Introduction

UD Swedish-TP is a conversion of the Prose section of Talbanken (Einarsson, 1976), originally annotated…

# Acknowledgments

The new conversion has been performed by Joakim Nivre and Aaron Smith at Uppsala University. We thank everyone who…

# (possibly any number of extra sections)

…

# Changelog

* 2015-05-15 v1.1
  * Added lemmas
  * Corrected tokenization in sentences 123 and 456
* 2015-01-15 v1.0
  * First release in UD

&lt;pre&gt;
=== Machine-readable metadata (DO NOT REMOVE!) ================================
(described in more detail below)
</pre>

## Treebank metadata

The table on the front page is automatically generated from special lines (metadata)
in the `README.txt` or `README.md` file for every treebank. The metadata are used for various
other automated tasks as well, for example the list of contributors to every UD release is
collected from the READMEs.

The metadata describe individual treebanks and there are often multiple treebanks per language.
If we want to work on UD documentation for a new language without having actual data, we still
must create a Github repository for the future treebank, and fill in the metadata so that the
language appears on the front page. The names of the contributors to the documentation should
be listed among the treebank contributors, otherwise they will not be included in the overall
UD list of contributors.

Here is an example of the treebank metadata block from the [Czech README file](https://github.com/UniversalDependencies/UD_Czech/blob/dev/README.md)

    <pre>
    === Machine-readable metadata (DO NOT REMOVE!) ================================
    Data available since: UD v1.0
    License: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    Includes text: yes
    Genre: news
    Lemmas: converted from manual
    UPOS: converted from manual
    XPOS: manual native
    Features: converted from manual
    Relations: converted from manual
    Contributors: Zeman, Daniel; Hajič, Jan
    Contributing: elsewhere
    Contact: zeman@ufal.mff.cuni.cz
    ===============================================================================
    </pre>

This block should be the last thing in the `README` file. The properties are as follows:

* `Data available since` can be `UD v1.0`, `UD v1.1`, `UD v1.2`, `UD v1.3`, `UD v1.4`, `UD v2.0`, `UD v2.1` etc.
  Pick the number of the first release where this treebank appears.
  Do not change it when the treebank is released the next time.
* `License`: anything containing the string `BY-NC-SA` will be given the CC non-commercial logo, `BY-SA` or `BY` the CC logo.
  See also [licensing](/contributing/licensing.html).
  * `Includes text`: Most treebanks should say `yes` here. But there are a few instances where
    the license of the underlying text does not allow redistribution. Here, the UD repository
    contains only the annotation without words and lemmas, but with a merging script that the
    user can run and merge the annotation with the corpus that they obtained through another
    channel. Such treebanks should say `no` here.
* `Genre`: this is simply a space-separated list of genres which gets mapped into symbols in the table. The possible genres are listed in [this file](https://github.com/UniversalDependencies/docs-automation/blob/master/genre_symbols.json)
  (symbols from [the *FontAwesome* list](https://fortawesome.github.io/Font-Awesome/icons/)).
  If you don't see yours, try to think of a less specific or similar genre that is on the list.
  Remember that this is just an approximation and we are not aiming at a fine-grained hierarchy of all possible genres.
  If you believe you really need a new genre, contact the release task force and try to persuade them.
  Note that simply editing the file will no longer help you because the validation software has its own list of known genres.
* Source of annotation of lemmas, POS tags, morphological features and dependency relations.
  There are several possible values:
  * `manual native` ... means that the annotation was done manually, directly in the UD annotation scheme.
    Note that manual verification of automatic annotation (e.g. you pre-parse the text before you give it to humans)
    counts as manual annotation.
  * `converted from manual` ... means that it was originally annotated in a non-UD scheme, then converted to UD by a program,
    but the converted annotation has not been verified by a human annotator.
  * `converted with corrections` ... significant spot-checking and manual corrections occurred after the conversion;
    however, it does not qualify as full manual annotation because not all words were visited systematically.
    This is an intermediate level between “converted from manual” and “manual native”.
  * `automatic` ... means that the annotation was predicted by a program such as tagger or parser.
  * `automatic with corrections` ... significant spot-checking and manual corrections occurred after the automatic prediction;
    however, it does not qualify as full manual annotation because not all words were visited systematically.
    This is an intermediate level between “automatic” and “manual native”.
  * `not available` ... means that this type of annotation is not present.
* Note that some values are available only for some types of annotation.
  UPOS tags and relations must always be available and cannot be automatic.
  * `Lemmas` ... `manual native | converted from manual | converted with corrections | automatic | automatic with corrections | not available`
  * `UPOS` ... `manual native | converted from manual | converted with corrections`
  * `XPOS` ... `manual native | automatic | automatic with corrections | not available`
  * `Features` ... `manual native | converted from manual | converted with corrections | automatic | automatic with corrections | not available`
  * `Relations` ... `manual native | converted from manual | converted with corrections`
* `Contributors`: the list of contributors to be included with the data release and in the LINDAT download page. This is a semicolon-separated list where every name is in the `Last, First` form and the `README` file should be utf-8 encoded to make sure special characters are preserved correctly.
* `Contributing`:
  * `here` ... The changes are done directly in the dev branch of the UD repository. Bugs can be fixed via pull requests.
  * `here source` ... The changes are done in the UD repository but not directly in the final CoNLL-U files. Instead, there is a folder called `not-to-release` where source files have to be located and fixed.
  * `elsewhere` ... Do not submit pull requests; create issues. Main development happens somewhere else. If there is a bug, either the original data or the conversion procedure must be fixed.
  * `to be adopted` ... The treebank currently misses a maintainer. If you know the language, please consider adopting the treebank.
* `Contact`: please add an e-mail address where the current maintainer of the data can be contacted. You can also include several e-mail addresses separated by commas.

If you want to see what web content will be generated from your README file, run the
`generate_treebank_hub.pl` script from the tools repository on your treebank folder,
e.g.

    tools/generate_treebank_hub.pl UD_Czech > for_web.md

## Repository branches

While the official UD release is always through Lindat, many users of UD source their data from the GitHub language repositories. Therefore, the `master` branch of every language should contain the last, officially released version of the data for the given language. The development in between releases should happen on the `dev` branch of the repository.
Treebank maintainers should never touch the `master` branch, they should always push to `dev`.
(Ordinary contributors are not even able to push to `master`, the branch is protected.)
At release time, the release task force will take care of merging the contents of the `dev` branch into `master`.
<strong>Please do not submit pull requests from the dev branch (or from anywhere else) to the master branch.</strong>
This is not needed for the release merge to take place, and if someone overlooks the destination branch and accepts the pull request,
it will again result in a commit to the master branch at wrong time.

(To make things a bit more confusing, this policy of data repositories does not apply to some other repositories that we use. In the `docs` repository you must work with the `pages-source` branch. That is done automatically if you edit the documentation in your browser via the _edit page_ link. You will also need to access the `tools` repository and upload the `deprel` and `feat_val` files specific for your treebank. In this case, please use the `master` branch.)

If you have no previous experience with Git, here is a quick tutorial on how to deal with the branches. Please refer to on-line documentation of Git and Github for more details. The tutorial assumes that you are communicating with Github from a Linux shell. The interface may be different if your OS is Windows. If you are working only with the Github web interface, you are not dependent on your operating system but you must remember to switch the `Branch: master` drop-down menu (left-hand side of the page) to `Branch: dev`; it always starts in `master` by default. In contrast, when you want to clone the repository to your local system, you need the address that is hidden under `Clone or download` in the right-hand side of the page, and that address is common for all branches. Our example is the [Italian ISDT repository](https://github.com/UniversalDependencies/UD_Italian-ISDT/tree/dev). Here is how you clone the repo to your system (`git clone` is the command, the remainder is the address copied from the Github web):

<pre>
git clone git@github.com:UniversalDependencies/UD_Italian-ISDT.git
<span style="color:blue">Cloning into 'UD_Italian-ISDT'...
remote: Counting objects: 215, done.
remote: Total 215 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 215
Receiving objects: 100% (215/215), 6.98 MiB | 4.55 MiB/s, done.
Resolving deltas: 100% (134/134), done.
Checking connectivity... done.</span>
</pre>

Then enter the cloned folder and switch to ("checkout") the `dev` branch. Your copy of the repository knows that such a branch exists on the server but it only creates your local copy of that branch once you ask for it. You may subsequently want to call `git pull` to make sure that you have the latest contents of the dev branch from the server:

<pre>
cd UD_Italian-ISDT
git checkout dev
<span style="color:blue">Branch dev set up to track remote branch dev from origin.
Switched to a new branch 'dev'</span>
git branch
<span style="color:blue">* dev
master</span>
git pull
<span style="color:blue">Already up-to-date.</span>
</pre>

Once you do this, you are all set. Your copy will stay switched to the dev branch unless you call `git checkout master` (or other `git checkout`) again. You will probably mostly need just `git status`, `git diff`, `git add`, `git commit`, `git push` and `git pull` commands. All pushes and pulls will be done against the remote `dev` branch.

<strong>Never ever modify the history of the git commits!</strong> While this is a bad practice in a collaborative environment in general, the immediate consequence in UD is that you will break the automatic re-validation of your treebank. (The validation server has its own copy of your repository, with the whole history. If a previously existing commit disappears from Github, it will look as if that commit is a local change on the validation server, and the validation server will no longer be able to automatically update its copy from Github.) So if you accidentaly commit a modification that is later found wrong, do not remove the commit from the history. Instead, revert the changes of the commit so that the inverse changes appear in your working copy, then add these changes to a new commit and push it to Github.
